W-14793301 W-14880984 partner and customer connector guide (#209)
mulesoft/docs-general: modules/ROOT/pages/partner-connector-upgrade.adoc

= Partner Guide for Upgrading and Testing Custom Connectors for Java 17

> NOTE: This guide applies to MuleSoft partners only. If you are a MuleSoft customer, see xref:customer-connector-upgrade.adoc[].

Reviewer: See previous comments on the Customer Guide. Maybe add a similar note there?

Reviewer: Please apply the edits that I mistakenly put on the customer version here. :)

> Upgrade and test your custom connectors for Java 17 to ensure compatibility within the MuleSoft ecosystem. 

Reviewer: I assume for is correct here, not to?

Author: I thought it sounded weird, but if I say "test your custom connectors to Java 17" also sounds weird. Should I just put "to"?

Reviewer: Maybe "with"? I guess "for" is best.

== Before You Begin

> Before upgrading and testing your custom connector for Java 17, you must be familiar with the following:

Reviewer: If the content is largely the same, consider using partials.

Author: Yup I will! I didn't initially because we had to convert the guides to pdfs but was going to use partials after that was done

* Mule Runtime Changes
+
See Mule Runtime. It contains a full list of the Java 17 changes made in Mule Runtime. 
+
** Reflection on Java classes
** Serialization
** Library upgrades
** Changes with running the test suite
** JPMS
// link to these docs which will be in the Mule Runtime docs

=== Add Missing Code

Because reflection is more restricted in Java 17, API objects now require setters. Previously, API objects and plain old Java objects (POJOs) had default constructors and getters for all properties. Now, API objects and POJOs must also have setters so DataWeave can build outside the connector in the Mule app. 

Constructors and setters are required if your class is instantiated, and getters are required if your class is read. If your class is returned and not instantiated, only getters are required. However, using both getters and setters simplify the validation and certification process. 

[[upgrade-your-rest-sdk-connectors]]
== Upgrade Your Custom REST SDK Connectors

Use REST SDK version 0.8.0-RC4 to upgrade your custom REST SDK connectors to Java 17. 

> REST SDK 0.8.0-RC4 generates Java 17-compatible connectors and maintains backward compatibility only with REST SDK 0.8.0-RC3 connectors built without Java customizations. Version 0.8.0-RC4 is not backward compatible with REST SDK versions earlier than 0.8.0-RC3. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
REST SDK 0.8.0-RC4 generates Java 17-compatible connectors and maintains backward compatibility only with REST SDK 0.8.0-RC3 connectors built without Java customizations. Version 0.8.0-RC4 is not backward-compatible with REST SDK versions earlier than 0.8.0-RC3. 
```

When upgrading REST SDK connectors to Java 17:

* For REST SDK version 0.8.0-RC3 and earlier connectors with Java customizations, regenerate the connector with REST SDK 0.8.0-RC4 and port over any Java customizations. 
+

> The resulting connector will likely break compatibility with the previous version of the connector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting connector likely breaks compatibility with the previous version of the connector.
```

> * For REST SDK  0.8.0-RC3 and earlier connectors without Java customizations, regenerate the connector with REST SDK 0.8.0-RC4. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For REST SDK 0.8.0-RC3 and earlier connectors without Java customizations, regenerate the connector with REST SDK 0.8.0-RC4. 
```

+

> The resulting connector will be backward compatible with the previous version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting connector backward-compatible with the previous version.
```

> For more information about REST SDK, see https://beta.docs.mulesoft.com/beta-mule-sdk/mule-sdk/1.1/rest-sdk/rest-sdk-connectivity[REST SDK]. 

Reviewer: Should this be an xref?

Author: Nope should be link

=== Upgrade an Existing Custom REST SDK Connector

If you previously generated a connector using REST SDK and you want to make that connector compatible with Java 17:

> . Upgrade the REST SDK components and dependencies to version 0.8.0-RC4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Upgrade the REST SDK components and dependencies to version 0.8.0-RC4:
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<parent>
   <groupId>com.mulesoft.connectivity</groupId>
   <artifactId>rest-sdk-connector-parent-pom</artifactId>
   <version>0.8.0-RC4</version>
</parent>

<rest.sdk.commons.version>0.8.0-RC4</rest.sdk.commons.version>
<rest.sdk.mojo.version>0.8.0-RC4</rest.sdk.mojo.version>
----

> . If you manually create the configuration class (ConnectorNameConfiguration.java) using the REST SDK override feature, you must add an extra annotation. 

Reviewer: font?

> . If you manually create the configuration class (ConnectorNameConfiguration.java) using the REST SDK override feature, you must add an extra annotation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. If you manually create the configuration class (`ConnectorNameConfiguration.java`) using the REST SDK override feature, you must add an extra annotation:
```

+
[source,java,linenums]
----
import org.mule.sdk.api.annotation.JavaVersionSupport;
import org.mule.sdk.api.meta.JavaVersion;

@JavaVersionSupport({JavaVersion.JAVA_8, JavaVersion.JAVA_11, JavaVersion.JAVA_17})

public class YourConnectorConfiguration
----
. Regenerate the connector.

=== Upgrade a New Custom REST SDK Connector

If you generate a new connector using REST SDK and want to make that connector compatible with Java 17:

> . Upgrade the REST SDK components and dependencies to version 0.8.0-RC4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Upgrade the REST SDK components and dependencies to version 0.8.0-RC4:
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<parent>
   <groupId>com.mulesoft.connectivity</groupId>
   <artifactId>rest-sdk-connector-parent-pom</artifactId>
   <version>0.8.0-RC4</version>
</parent>

<rest.sdk.commons.version>0.8.0-RC4</rest.sdk.commons.version>
<rest.sdk.mojo.version>0.8.0-RC4</rest.sdk.mojo.version>
---- 

> . Upgrade the Mule runtime version to 4.6.0.

Reviewer: OK as long as you previously call it "Mule runtime engine" (per Term Ref).

[[upgrade-your-rest-connect-connectors]]
== Upgrade Your Custom REST Connect Connectors 

Upgrade your custom REST Connect connectors to Java 17.

> REST Connect now supports Java 17. REST Connect connectors are generated from an API specification using REST Connect, so all you have to do to make the connector Java 17-compatible is republish the API specification to Exchange. See xref:exchange::to-deploy-using-rest-connect.adoc[REST Connect Connector Generator].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
REST Connect now supports Java 17. REST Connect connectors are generated from an API specification using REST Connect. To make the connector Java 17-compatible, republish the API specification to Exchange. See xref:exchange::to-deploy-using-rest-connect.adoc[REST Connect Connector Generator].
```

> IMPORTANT: REST Connect now adds support for TLS. To save time, you can enable TLS at the same time with the Java 17 upgrade. This way, you only need to generate the connector and test your apps once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: REST Connect now adds support for TLS. Enable TLS during the Java 17 upgrade to save time generating the connector and testing your apps.
```

Reviewer: Not sure if that changes the meaning... Ignore if so.

 
== Test Your Custom Connector with MTF

> Test your custom connector with Module Testing Framework (MTF) to ensure Java 17 compatibility. For more information about MTF, see https://beta.docs.mulesoft.com/beta-mtf/mule-sdk/1.1/mtf[MTF]. 

Reviewer: change to xref format?

Author: Supposed to be link

=== Set Up Your Build

Ensure your pipeline runs against all supported Java versions (Java 8, Java 11, and Java 17). The following example shows a single build pipeline that is configured to run tests against all supported Java versions, in which `default` corresponds to Java 17:

image:single-build-pipeline.png[Example of single build pipeline]

The pipeline runs all tests even if the previous tests fail. For example, the pipeline runs Java 17 tests even if the Java 11 tests fail. 

> Although there are multiple tests, the pipeline has one compilation phase and one release phase, which targets Java 8.

Reviewer: (I try to avoid "there are" construction, if possible.)

=== Run an Initial Test

> Run an initial test to test your custom connector for Java 17 compatibility. You can continue to run tests as you change your custom connector’s code.

Reviewer: possessive necessary?

> Run an initial test to test your custom connector for Java 17 compatibility. You can continue to run tests as you change your custom connector’s code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run an initial test to test your custom connector for Java 17 compatibility. You can continue to run tests as you change your custom connector code:
```

> . Go to your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file and update the munit-extensions-maven-plugin configuration to include the following configuration (the jacoco.version property must be 0.8.10 or later): 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the custom connector’s `pom.xml` file, update the munit-extensions-maven-plugin configuration to include the following configuration (the `jacoco.version` property must be 0.8.10 or later): 
```

. Open IntelliJ IDEA.
. Go to *Run* > *Show Coverage Data*.
. In *Choose Coverage Suite to Display*, add `jacoco-munit.exec` to the list if it's not there already.
. Look at the coverage percentages to analyze your results.

=== Add the JDeps Maven Plugin

JDeps is a tool for static code analysis that detects the usage of JDK internal APIs that are no longer available or accessible. For more information, refer to the https://wiki.openjdk.org/display/JDK8/Java+Dependency+Analysis+Tool[OpenJDK wiki]. 

Add the JDeps Maven plugin to your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
    <artifactId>maven-jdeps-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>3.1.2</version>
    <executions>
        <execution>
            <goals>
               <goal>jdkinternals</goal> <!-- verify main classes -->
               <goal>test-jdkinternals</goal> <!-- verify test classes -->
            </goals>
        </execution>
    </executions>
    <configuration>
        <failOnWarning>true</failOnWarning>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

> === Test for Java 17 Compatibility 

Reviewer: Should this be a gerund heading since it's a parent to multiple tasks?

Author: See my other comment about gerunds/imperatives

Reviewer: If the section contains no steps, it shouldn't be imperative...

You can test for Java 17 compatibility running on either Java 11 or Java 17. 

> If you are running on Java 11, you can still perform early validations by adding a parameter for illegal reflective access. See <<add-a-parameter-for-illegal-reflective-access>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are running on Java 11, you can perform early validations by adding a parameter for illegal reflective access. See <<add-a-parameter-for-illegal-reflective-access>>.
```

If you are running on Java 17, you can test for Java 17 directly. See <<test-for-java-17-compatibility-directly>>.

[[add-a-parameter-for-illegal-reflective-access]]
==== Add a Parameter for Illegal Reflective Access

Reflective access is one of the breaking changes of Java 17. If you run your MTF tests with the default Java 11 behavior, the MTF tests log only a warning for reflective access. 

To resemble Java 17 behavior, run your MTF tests with the `--illegal-access=deny` JVM parameter so the MTF tests fail instead of logging only a warning. Use this parameter in Mule runtime versions 4.2.0 and later.

To set up your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file to include the configuration:

. Add an empty property:
+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<mtf.javaopts></mtf.javaopts>
----
. Update the munit-extensions-maven-plugin configuration to include the following configuration:
+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<environmentVariables>
   <!-- Toggles the JDK17 style flag -->

>    <_JAVA_OPTIONS>-XX:+PrintCommandLineFlags ${mtf.javaopts}</_JAVA_OPTIONS>

Reviewer: _JAVA correct?

Author: Yup

</environmentVariables>
----

You can now run your MTF tests with the `--illegal-access=deny` parameter. Here is an example bash script: 

[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash
RUNTIME_VERSION=4.6.0
MUNIT_JVM=/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/adoptopenjdk-11.jdk/Contents/Home/bin/java
mvn clean
mkdir target 
mvn verify \
    -DruntimeProduct=MULE_EE \
    -DruntimeVersion=$RUNTIME_VERSION \
    -Dmunit.jvm=$MUNIT_JVM \
    -Dmtf.javaopts="--illegal-access=deny" > ./target/test.log
----

After running your MTF tests, go to the `target/illegal-access.log` file and check for classes or dependencies that misbehave. 

You can also use the following command to exclude the known warnings outside of your custom connector: 

[source,bash]
----
cat target/illegal-access.log | sort | uniq | grep -Ev "org.mule.module.artifact|org.mule.metadata|org.mule.runtime|org.mule.service"
----

[[test-for-java-17-compatibility-directly]]
==== Test for Java 17 Compatibility Directly

Run your MTF tests to test compatibility of your custom connector against Java 17. 

> As mentioned previously, you can have a single build pipeline that runs against all supported Java versions. You can also choose to set up another temporary build pipeline for Java 17 so your main build pipeline doesn't become unstable. After you upgrade to Java 17, you can discard the temporary build pipeline and converge on your main build pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned previously, you can use a single build pipeline that runs against all supported Java versions. You can also set up another temporary build pipeline for Java 17 so your main build pipeline doesn't become unstable. After you upgrade to Java 17, discard the temporary build pipeline and converge on your main build pipeline.
```

. Set the path to your JVM installation in the MUNIT_JVM variable (you must install it yourself). You must also set JAVA_HOME to Java 8. 
. Ensure the following MTF dependencies are set in your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file:
+
* munit 3.1.0
* munit-extensions-maven-plugin 1.2.0
* mtf-tools 1.2.0
* mule-maven-plugin 4.1.0
* mule-extensions-maven-plugin 1.6.0-rc1
+

> . These MTF dependencies have a minimum Mule version of 4.3.0. To ensure your MTF tests do not validate against Mule runtime versions earlier than 4.3.0, add this to the munit-plugin configuration of your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file: 

Reviewer: This isn't a user step...

> . These MTF dependencies have a minimum Mule version of 4.3.0. To ensure your MTF tests do not validate against Mule runtime versions earlier than 4.3.0, add this to the munit-plugin configuration of your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These MTF dependencies require a minimum Mule version of 4.3.0.
. Ensure that your MTF tests don't validate against Mule runtime versions earlier than 4.3.0 by adding the following to the munit-plugin configuration of your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file: 
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<configuration>
	[...]
<runtimeConfiguration>
    <discoverRuntimes>
        <minMuleVersion>${minVersion}</minMuleVersion>
        <includeSnapshots>false</includeSnapshots>
        <product>EE</product>
    </discoverRuntimes>
</runtimeConfiguration>
</configuration>
----

You can run MTF tests against Java 17 only with Mule runtime 4.6.0 and later. For Mule runtime 4.5.x and earlier, you can run MTF tests only against Java 8 and Java 11. 

MUnit 3.1 is compatible only with Mule runtime 4.3.0 and later. If your connector is compatible with Mule runtime 4.2.0 and earlier, you must create a legacy profile that overrides the MUnit version.

Use the following bash script to test your custom connector against Java 17: 

[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash
RUNTIME_VERSION=4.6.0
MUNIT_JVM=/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/temurin-17.jdk/Contents/Home/bin/java
mvn clean
mkdir target
mvn verify \
   -DruntimeProduct=MULE_EE \
   -DruntimeVersion=$RUNTIME_VERSION \
   -Dmunit.jvm=$MUNIT_JVM \
   -Dmule.module.tweaking.validation.skip=true \
   -Dmule.jvm.version.extension.enforcement=LOOSE > ./target/test.log
----

> === Read Your Tests 

Reviewer: Is this part of testing or parallel to testing? If part, should it be H4?

Author: It is parallel so H3

After you run your MTF tests, your build has either of the following outcomes:

* Test failures
+

> You will likely have to make changes to your custom connector code to ensure Java 17 compatibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You probably need to change your custom connector code to ensure Java 17 compatibility.
```

* All tests pass
+

> Either your custom connector does not require any major changes or your test suite is not comprehensive enough. You might want to review your test suite and double-check that your code coverage is good and that your test scenarios and assertions are not too simple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Either your custom connector does not require any major changes or your test suite is not comprehensive enough. Review your test suite and double-check that your code coverage is good and that your test scenarios and assertions are not too simple.
```

=== Communicate the Support Level of Your Custom Connector

> After you update your code and your tests are green, you are ready to release a new Java 17-compatible version of your custom connector. 

Reviewer: I assume green is correct here?

> . To communicate Java 17 compatibility, you must generate metadata for Java compatibility of your custom connector by adding or upgrading the custom connector’s mule-sdk-api dependency to the latest version: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. To communicate Java 17 compatibility, generate metadata for Java compatibility of your custom connector by adding or upgrading the custom connector’s `mule-sdk-api` dependency to the latest version: 
```

Reviewer: Maybe that font change suggestion is incorrect...

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<dependency>
   <groupId>org.mule.sdk</groupId>
   <artifactId>mule-sdk-api</artifactId>
   <version>0.7.0</version>
</dependency>
----

> . Add the `@JavaVersionSupport` annotation in the same class that has the `@Extension` annotation and include the JAVA_17 value, for example: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add the `@JavaVersionSupport` annotation in the same class as the `@Extension` annotation and include the JAVA_17 value, for example: 
```

+
[source,java,linenums]
----
@Extension(name = "Database")
@Operations(...)
@JavaVersionSupport({JAVA_8, JAVA_11, JAVA_17})
public class DatabaseConnector {
..
}
----

In Mule 4.5.0 and later, custom connectors that do not specify the `@JavaVersionSupport` annotation are assumed to be compatible with Java 8 and Java 11.

> You can mark your custom connector as compatible with Java 17 only, however, you must ensure there are no adoption or backward compatibility issues. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can mark your custom connector as compatible with Java 17 only; however, you must ensure that no adoption or backward compatibility issues exist. 
```

When you deploy a Mule app, Mule verifies that all modules in the Mule app are compatible with the Java version. If Mule finds an incompatibility, Mule throws an error and the application does not deploy. 

> If your code is compatible with Java 17 but you do not declare Java 17 compatibility, you can still get a successful test run. If you want to run a quick check on your custom connector or if one of your dependencies is not ready yet, you can pass an argument to avoid making hard checks on the Java support declaration.

Reviewer: "get a successful test run" -> run successfully?

Reviewer: Probably this is correct as is, but is it possible to tighten the language?

Author: I think we want to highlight the output - that you will get a successful test run

> If your code is compatible with Java 17 but you do not declare Java 17 compatibility, you can still get a successful test run. If you want to run a quick check on your custom connector or if one of your dependencies is not ready yet, you can pass an argument to avoid making hard checks on the Java support declaration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your code is compatible with Java 17 but you do not declare Java 17 compatibility, you can still get a successful test run. To run a quick check on your custom connector or if one of your dependencies is not ready yet, you can pass an argument to avoid making hard checks on the Java support declaration.
```

> If your code is compatible with Java 17 but you do not declare Java 17 compatibility, you can still get a successful test run. If you want to run a quick check on your custom connector or if one of your dependencies is not ready yet, you can pass an argument to avoid making hard checks on the Java support declaration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your code is compatible with Java 17 but you do not declare Java 17 compatibility, you can still get a successful test run. 
+
To run a quick check on your custom connector or if all dependencies are not ready, pass the following argument to skip hard checks on the Java support declaration:
```

= Partner Guide for Upgrading and Testing Custom Connectors for Java 17

> NOTE: This guide applies only to MuleSoft partners.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: This guide applies to MuleSoft partners only. If you are a MuleSoft customer, see xref:customer-connector-upgrade.adoc[].
```

Upgrade and test your custom connectors for Java 17 to ensure compatibility within the MuleSoft ecosystem. 

> == Before You Begin

Reviewer 2: All of this info seems more like best practices than prereqs.

Author: Daniel said he wants a "before you begin" section and our style guide says not to say "best practices"

Before upgrading and testing your custom connector for Java 17, you must be familiar with the following:

> * *Running and compiling your custom connector*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* *How to run and compile your custom connector*
```

+
Ensure your custom connector runs with Java 17, but always use Java 8 as the target compilation level.
+
Because you must compile your custom connector with Java 8, use the Java compiler configuration from the Java SDK parent POM. You can’t use language features from Java 11 or Java 17. 

> * *Avoiding -add-opens or -add-export directives*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* *-add-opens or -add-export directives*
```

+

> Do not set -add-opens or -add-export directives.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Do not set `-add-opens` or `-add-export` directives.
```

> * *Understanding minimum Mule version caveats*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* *Minimum Mule version caveats*
```

+

> If your custom connector has a minimum Mule version that is incompatible with Java 17 (Mule 4.5.x and earlier), you can’t run Java 17 tests that extend the MuleArtifactFunctionalTestCase. You can still run Java 8 tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your custom connector is running on Mule 4.5.x or earlier, you can’t run Java 17 tests that extend the MuleArtifactFunctionalTestCase, but you can still run Java 8 tests.
```

+

> To decouple the minimum Mule version when running tests, add the -Dmunit.jvm parameter to use Java 17 as described in <<test-for-java-17-compatibility-directly>>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To decouple the minimum Mule version when running tests, add the `-Dmunit.jvm` parameter to use Java 17 as described in <<test-for-java-17-compatibility-directly>>.
```

> == Upgrade Your Custom Connector

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> The steps to upgrade differ depending on how your connector is developed. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> * <<upgrade-your-mule-sdk-connectors>> (Java SDK and XML SDK)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

* <<upgrade-your-rest-sdk-connectors>>

> * <<upgrade-your-rest-connect-connectors>> 

Reviewer 2: I don't know why I'm suggesting. Basically delete the whole thing.

[[upgrade-your-mule-sdk-connectors]]

> === Upgrade Your Mule SDK Connectors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Upgrade Your Mule SDK Connectors
```

> Upgrade your Mule SDK (Java SDK and XML SDK) connectors to Java 17:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Upgrade your Mule SDK Java SDK connectors to Java 17:
```

> ==== Upgrade Third-Party Libraries

Reviewer 2: Normally, we don't want to go 4 levels in. Max 3. But if this is the best way, it's probably not that important.

> ==== Upgrade Third-Party Libraries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Upgrade Third-Party Libraries
```

Upgrade your custom connector’s third-party libraries to be compatible with Java 17.

> ===== Upgrade Java EE Libraries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Upgrade Java EE Libraries
```

Mule 4.6 exposes Java EE libraries differently. You must add the following BOM dependency to your custom connector and, if applicable, ensure the provided conflicting library is properly excluded. You can also add the libraries in the BOM dependency separately.

[source,java,linenums]
----
<muleJavaEeBomVersion>4.6.0-20231025</muleJavaEeBomVersion>
  <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>org.mule</groupId>
        <artifactId>mule-javaee-runtime-bom</artifactId>
        <version>${muleJavaEeBomVersion}</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>
----

> ===== Upgrade External Libraries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Upgrade External Libraries
```

Upgrade external libraries, which are third-party libraries that are not bundled with your custom connector. Some examples include a JDBC driver, JMS broker client, or Groovy runtime. The following example shows a JDBC driver external library configuration: 

[source,java,linenums]
----
@ExternalLib(name = "MySQL JDBC Driver",
description = "A JDBC driver that supports connection to the MySQL Database",
nameRegexpMatcher = "(.*)\\.jar",
requiredClassName = "com.mysql.jdbc.Driver",
coordinates = "mysql:mysql-connector-java:5.1.44")
public class MySqlConnectionProvider implements ConnectionProvider<Connection> {
  //
}
----

You must update your external libraries to a version that is compatible with Java 17. 

> ==== Review Your Code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Review Your Code
```

Even though you compile your custom connector with Java 8, ensure you can run your custom connector with Java 17. Reviewing your code is important because there are some restrictions that are flagged as warnings in Java 11 but are flagged as failures and can’t be disabled in Java 17. For example, reflection is more restricted in Java 17, so you must review your code to ensure there are no illegal actions. 

Learn about the different changes in Java 17 to review your code effectively.

> ===== JDK Migration Guide

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== JDK Migration Guide
```

> See the https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/migrate/getting-started.html#GUID-C25E2B1D-6C24-4403-8540-CFEA875B994A[Oracle JDK Migration Guide]. It contains a full list of the changes made in Java 17. Use the guide to assess impact to your code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See the https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/migrate/getting-started.html#GUID-C25E2B1D-6C24-4403-8540-CFEA875B994A[Oracle JDK Migration Guide] for a full list of the changes made in Java 17. Use the guide to assess the impact to your code.
```

> ===== Mule Runtime Changes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Mule Runtime Changes
```

See <<LINK TO MULE RUNTIME>>. It contains a full list of the Java 17 changes made in Mule Runtime. 

* <<Reflection on Java classes>> 
* <<Serialization>>
* <<Library upgrades>>
* <<Changes with running the test suite>>? 
* <<JPMS>>
// link to these docs which will be in the Mule Runtime docs

=== Add Missing Code

Because reflection is more restricted in Java 17, API objects now require setters. Previously, API objects and plain old Java objects (POJOs) had default constructors and getters for all properties. Now, API objects and POJOs must also have setters so DataWeave can build outside the connector in the Mule app. 

Constructors and setters are required if your class is instantiated, and getters are required if your class is read. If your class is returned and not instantiated, only getters are required. However, using both getters and setters simplify the validation and certification process. 

[[upgrade-your-rest-sdk-connectors]]

> === Upgrade Your REST SDK Connectors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Upgrade Your REST SDK Connectors
```

> Upgrade your REST SDK connectors to Java 17 by using the REST SDK 0.8.0-RC4 version. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use REST SDK version 0.8.0-RC4 to upgrade your REST SDK connectors to Java 17. 
```

> 0.8.0-RC4 generates Java 17 compatible connectors and maintains backward compatibility only with 0.8.0-RC3 connectors built without Java customizations. 0.8.0-RC4 is not backward compatible with REST SDK versions earlier than 0.8.0-RC3. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
REST SDK 0.8.0-RC4 generates Java 17-compatible connectors and maintains backward compatibility only with REST SDK 0.8.0-RC3 connectors built without Java customizations. Version 0.8.0-RC4 is not backward compatible with REST SDK versions earlier than 0.8.0-RC3. 
```

When upgrading REST SDK connectors to Java 17:

> * For connectors with versions earlier than 0.8.0-RC3, or connectors with version 0.8.0-RC3 with Java customizations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For REST SDK version 0.8.0-RC3 and earlier connectors with Java customizations:
```

+

> Regenerate the connector with 0.8.0-RC4 and port over any Java customizations. The resulting connector will likely break compatibility with the previous version of the connector.

Reviewer 2: And...? So it requires a new major version of the connector? Is there something they need to do when backward compatibility is broken?

Author: I think it is up to partners on how they version their connectors

> Regenerate the connector with 0.8.0-RC4 and port over any Java customizations. The resulting connector will likely break compatibility with the previous version of the connector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Regenerate the connector with REST SDK 0.8.0-RC4. 
. Port over any Java customizations. 

The resulting connector will likely break compatibility with the previous version of the connector.
```

> * For connectors with version 0.8.0-RC3 without Java customizations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For REST SDK  0.8.0-RC3 and earlier connectors without Java customizations, regenerate the connector with REST SDK 0.8.0-RC4. 
```

+

> When you regenerate the connector with 0.8.0-RC4, the resulting connector will be backward compatible with the previous version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The resulting connector will be backward compatible with the previous version.
```

For more information about REST SDK, see https://beta.docs.mulesoft.com/beta-mule-sdk/mule-sdk/1.1/rest-sdk/rest-sdk-connectivity[REST SDK]. 

> ==== Upgrade an Existing REST SDK Connector

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Upgrade an Existing REST SDK Connector
```

If you previously generated a connector using REST SDK and you want to make that connector compatible with Java 17:

> . Upgrade the REST SDK components and dependencies to 0.8.0-RC4.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Upgrade the REST SDK components and dependencies to version  0.8.0-RC4.
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<parent>
   <groupId>com.mulesoft.connectivity</groupId>
   <artifactId>rest-sdk-connector-parent-pom</artifactId>
   <version>0.8.0-RC4</version>
</parent>

<rest.sdk.commons.version>0.8.0-RC4</rest.sdk.commons.version>
<rest.sdk.mojo.version>0.8.0-RC4</rest.sdk.mojo.version>
----

> . If you manually create the configuration class (ConnectorNameConfiguration.java) using the REST SDK overriding feature, you must add an extra annotation. 

Reviewer 2: Overriding feature doesn't sound right. Override feature? Maybe add a link to the feature doc?

+
[source,java,linenums]
----
import org.mule.sdk.api.annotation.JavaVersionSupport;
import org.mule.sdk.api.meta.JavaVersion;

@JavaVersionSupport({JavaVersion.JAVA_8, JavaVersion.JAVA_11, JavaVersion.JAVA_17})

public class YourConnectorConfiguration
----
. Regenerate the connector.

> ==== Upgrade a New REST SDK Connector

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Upgrade a New REST SDK Connector
```

If you generate a new connector using REST SDK and want to make that connector compatible with Java 17:

. Upgrade the REST SDK components and dependencies to 0.8.0-RC4.
+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<parent>
   <groupId>com.mulesoft.connectivity</groupId>
   <artifactId>rest-sdk-connector-parent-pom</artifactId>
   <version>0.8.0-RC4</version>
</parent>

<rest.sdk.commons.version>0.8.0-RC4</rest.sdk.commons.version>
<rest.sdk.mojo.version>0.8.0-RC4</rest.sdk.mojo.version>
---- 
. Upgrade the Mule runtime version to 4.6.0.

[[upgrade-your-rest-connect-connectors]]

> === Upgrade Your REST Connect Connectors 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Upgrade Your REST Connect Connectors 
```

IMPORTANT: REST Connect now adds support for TLS. To save time, you can enable TLS at the same time with the Java 17 upgrade. This way, you only need to generate the connector and test your apps once.
 
== Test Your Custom Connector with MTF

Test your custom connector with Module Testing Framework (MTF) to ensure Java 17 compatibility. For more information about MTF, see https://beta.docs.mulesoft.com/beta-mtf/mule-sdk/1.1/mtf[MTF]. 

=== Set Up Your Build

Ensure your pipeline runs against all supported Java versions (Java 8, Java 11, and Java 17). The following example shows a single build pipeline that is configured to run tests against all supported Java versions, in which `default` corresponds to Java 17:

image:single-build-pipeline.png[Example of single build pipeline]

The pipeline runs all tests even if the previous tests fail. For example, the pipeline runs Java 17 tests even if the Java 11 tests fail. 

> Although there are multiple tests, the pipeline has one compilation phase and one release phase which target Java 8.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although there are multiple tests, the pipeline has one compilation phase and one release phase, which targets Java 8.
```

=== Run Your Tests

Run MTF tests to ensure your custom connector is compatible with Java 17.

> ==== Run an Initial Test

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Run an Initial Test
```

Run an initial test to test your custom connector for Java 17 compatibility. You can continue to run tests as you change your custom connector’s code.

> . Go to your custom connector’s pom.xml file and update the munit-extensions-maven-plugin configuration to include the following configuration. The jacoco.version property must be 0.8.10 or later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Go to your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file and update the munit-extensions-maven-plugin configuration to include the following configuration (the jacoco.version property must be 0.8.10 or later): 
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<argLines>
         <argLine>                      -javaagent:${settings.localRepository}/org/jacoco/org.jacoco.agent/${jacoco.version}/org.jacoco.agent-${jacoco.version}-runtime.jar=destfile=${session.executionRootDirectory}/target/jacoco-munit.exec</argLine>
</argLines>
----
. Run your MTF test to generate the coverage report.

> ==== View your Coverage Report

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== View your Coverage Report
```

View your coverage report to see your custom connector’s coverage. You must have at least 80% coverage for a high certainty of Java 17 compatibility. 

. Open IntelliJ IDEA.
. Go to *Run* > *Show Coverage Data*.

> . In *Choose Coverage Suite to Display*, add jacoco-munit.exec to the list if it is not there already.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In *Choose Coverage Suite to Display*, add `jacoco-munit.exec` to the list if it's not there already.
```

> . Analyze your results by looking at the percentages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Look at the coverage percentages to analyze your results.
```

> ==== Add the JDeps Maven Plugin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Add the JDeps Maven Plugin
```

JDeps is a tool for static code analysis that detects the usage of JDK internal APIs that are no longer available or accessible. For more information, refer to the https://wiki.openjdk.org/display/JDK8/Java+Dependency+Analysis+Tool[OpenJDK wiki]. 

> Add the JDeps Maven plugin to your custom connector’s pom.xml file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the JDeps Maven plugin to your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file:
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
    <artifactId>maven-jdeps-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>3.1.2</version>
    <executions>
        <execution>
            <goals>
               <goal>jdkinternals</goal> <!-- verify main classes -->
               <goal>test-jdkinternals</goal> <!-- verify test classes -->
            </goals>
        </execution>
    </executions>
    <configuration>
        <failOnWarning>true</failOnWarning>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

> ==== Test for Java 17 Compatibility 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Test for Java 17 Compatibility 
```

> You can test for Java 17 compatibility either running on Java 11 or running on Java 17. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can test for Java 17 compatibility running on either Java 11 or Java 17. 
```

If you are running on Java 11, you can still perform early validations by adding a parameter for illegal reflective access. See <<add-a-parameter-for-illegal-reflective-access>>.

If you are running on Java 17, you can test for Java 17 directly. See <<test-for-java-17-compatibility-directly>>.

[[add-a-parameter-for-illegal-reflective-access]]

> ===== Add a Parameter for Illegal Reflective Access

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Add a Parameter for Illegal Reflective Access
```

Reflective access is one of the breaking changes of Java 17. If you run your MTF tests with the default Java 11 behavior, the MTF tests log only a warning for reflective access. 

To resemble Java 17 behavior, run your MTF tests with the `--illegal-access=deny` JVM parameter so the MTF tests fail instead of logging only a warning. Use this parameter in Mule runtime versions 4.2.0 and later.

> To set up your custom connector’s pom.xml file to include the configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To set up your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file to include the configuration:
```

----
. Update the munit-extensions-maven-plugin configuration to include the following configuration:
+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<environmentVariables>
   <!-- Toggles the JDK17 style flag -->
   <_JAVA_OPTIONS>-XX:+PrintCommandLineFlags ${mtf.javaopts}</_JAVA_OPTIONS>
</environmentVariables>
----

You can now run your MTF tests with the `--illegal-access=deny` parameter. Here is an example bash script: 

[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash
RUNTIME_VERSION=4.6.0
MUNIT_JVM=/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/adoptopenjdk-11.jdk/Contents/Home/bin/java
mvn clean
mkdir target 
mvn verify \
    -DruntimeProduct=MULE_EE \
    -DruntimeVersion=$RUNTIME_VERSION \
    -Dmunit.jvm=$MUNIT_JVM \
    -Dmtf.javaopts="--illegal-access=deny" > ./target/test.log
----

After running your MTF tests, go to the `target/illegal-access.log` file and check for classes or dependencies that misbehave. 

You can also use the following command to exclude the known warnings outside of your custom connector: 

[source,bash]
----
cat target/illegal-access.log | sort | uniq | grep -Ev "org.mule.module.artifact|org.mule.metadata|org.mule.runtime|org.mule.service"
----

[[test-for-java-17-compatibility-directly]]

> ===== Test for Java 17 Compatibility Directly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Test for Java 17 Compatibility Directly
```

Run your MTF tests to test compatibility of your custom connector against Java 17. 

> As mentioned previously, you can have a single build pipeline that runs against all supported Java versions. You can also choose to set up another temporary build pipeline for Java 17 so your main build pipeline does not become unstable. When you are done upgrading to Java 17, you can discard the temporary build pipeline and converge on your main build pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned previously, you can have a single build pipeline that runs against all supported Java versions. You can also choose to set up another temporary build pipeline for Java 17 so your main build pipeline doesn't become unstable. After you upgrade to Java 17, you can discard the temporary build pipeline and converge on your main build pipeline.
```

Use the following bash script to test your custom connector against Java 17: 

[source,bash]
----
#!/bin/bash
RUNTIME_VERSION=4.6.0
MUNIT_JVM=/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/temurin-17.jdk/Contents/Home/bin/java
mvn clean
mkdir target
mvn verify \
   -DruntimeProduct=MULE_EE \
   -DruntimeVersion=$RUNTIME_VERSION \
   -Dmunit.jvm=$MUNIT_JVM \
   -Dmule.module.tweaking.validation.skip=true \
   -Dmule.jvm.version.extension.enforcement=LOOSE > ./target/test.log
----

> Set the path to your JVM installation in the MUNIT_JVM variable, but you must install it yourself. You must also set JAVA_HOME to Java 8. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set the path to your JVM installation in the MUNIT_JVM variable (you must install it yourself). You must also set JAVA_HOME to Java 8. 
```

Reviewer 2: This seems like a step.

> You must also ensure the following MTF dependencies are set in your custom connector’s pom.xml file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ensure the following MTF dependencies are set in your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file:
```

Reviewer 2: This seems like a step.

* munit 3.1.0
* munit-extensions-maven-plugin 1.2.0
* mtf-tools 1.2.0
* mule-maven-plugin 4.1.0
* mule-extensions-maven-plugin 1.6.0-rc1

> These MTF dependencies have a minimum Mule version of 4.3.0. To ensure your MTF tests do not validate against Mule runtime versions earlier than 4.3.0, you must add this to the munit-plugin configuration of your custom connector’s pom.xml file: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These MTF dependencies have a minimum Mule version of 4.3.0. To ensure your MTF tests do not validate against Mule runtime versions earlier than 4.3.0, you must add the following to the munit-plugin configuration of your custom connector’s `pom.xml` file: 
```

Reviewer 2: Step

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<configuration>
	[...]
<runtimeConfiguration>
    <discoverRuntimes>
        <minMuleVersion>${minVersion}</minMuleVersion>
        <includeSnapshots>false</includeSnapshots>
        <product>EE</product>
    </discoverRuntimes>
</runtimeConfiguration>
</configuration>
----

> You can only run MTF tests against Java 17 with Mule runtime 4.6.0 and later. For Mule runtime versions earlier than 4.6.0, you can only run MTF tests against Java 8 and Java 11. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can run MTF tests against Java 17 only with Mule runtime 4.6.0 and later. For Mule runtime 4.5.x and earlier, you can run MTF tests only against Java 8 and Java 11. 
```

> MUnit 3.1 is only compatible with Mule runtime 4.3.0 and later. If your connector is compatible with Mule runtime 4.2.0 and earlier, you must create a legacy profile that overrides the MUnit version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MUnit 3.1 is compatible only with Mule runtime 4.3.0 and later. If your connector is compatible with Mule runtime 4.2.0 and earlier, you must create a legacy profile that overrides the MUnit version.
```

=== Read Your Tests 

After you run your MTF tests, your build has either of the following outcomes:

* Test failures
+
You will likely have to make changes to your custom connector code to ensure Java 17 compatibility.

* All tests pass
+

> Either your custom connector does not require any major changes or your test suite is not comprehensive enough. You might want to review your test suite and double-check that your code coverage is good and that your test scenarios and assertions are not excessively naive.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what "excessively naive" means. Is there better wording, like "too simple" or something?

=== Communicate the Support Level of Your Custom Connector

After you update your code and your tests are green, you are ready to release a new Java 17 compatible version of your custom connector. 

> To communicate Java 17 compatibility, you must generate metadata regarding Java compatibility of your custom connector. Add or upgrade the custom connector’s mule-sdk-api dependency to the latest version: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. To communicate Java 17 compatibility, you must generate metadata for Java compatibility of your custom connector by adding or upgrading the custom connector’s mule-sdk-api dependency to the latest version: 
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<dependency>
   <groupId>org.mule.sdk</groupId>
   <artifactId>mule-sdk-api</artifactId>
   <version>0.7.0</version>
</dependency>
----

> Next, use the new @JavaVersionSupport annotation to specify the added support of Java 17. In Mule 4.5 and later, custom connectors that do not specify the @JavaVersionSupport annotation are assumed to be compatible with Java 8 and Java 11. Add the @JavaVersionSupport annotation in the same class that has the @Extension annotation and include the JAVA_17 value, for example: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Add the `@JavaVersionSupport` annotation in the same class that has the `@Extension` annotation and include the JAVA_17 value, for example: 
```

[source,java,linenums]
----
@Extension(name = "Database")
@Operations(...)
@JavaVersionSupport({JAVA_8, JAVA_11,JAVA_17})
public class DatabaseConnector {
..
}
----

> 

Reviewer 2: In Mule 4.5 and later, custom connectors that do not specify the `@JavaVersionSupport` annotation are assumed to be compatible with Java 8 and Java 11.

Reviewer 2: Basically, move this info after the instruction.

Author: Mule 4.6 right?

> It is possible to mark your custom connector as only compatible with Java 17, however you must ensure there are no adoption or backward compatibility issues. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can mark your custom connector as compatible with Java 17 only, however, you must ensure there are no adoption or backward compatibility issues. 
```
